Life in the Iron Mills begins with an omniscient narrator who looks out a window and sees smog and iron workers.
The gender of the narrator is never known, but it is evident that the narrator is a middle class observer.
As the narrator looks out the windowpane, an old story comes to mind; a story of the house that the narrator is living in.
The narrator cautions the reader to have an objective mind, and to not be quick to judge the character in the story he/she is about to tell the reader.
The narrator begins to introduce Deborah, Wolfe's cousin.
She is described as a meek woman who works hard, and has a hump in her back.
Deborah finds out from Janey, that Hugh did not take lunch to work, and she decides to walk many miles in the rain to take a lunch for Wolfe.
As she walks up to the mills, Deborah begins to describe it as if it were hell, but she keeps going for Wolfe.
When she arrives Wolfe is talking amongst friends and he recognizes her.
The narrator explains his affection for her, but also describes his affection as loveless and sympathetic.
Hugh finds no time to eat his dinner and goes back to do a day of labor in the mills.
Deborah, who is exhausted, stays with Hugh and rests until his shift is over.
In the meantime, the narrator further explains that Wolfe does not belong in the environment of the iron mill workers.
He is known as "Molly Wolfe" by other workers because of his manner and background in education.
When Wolfe is working he spots men that do not look like workers.
He sees Clarke, the son of Kirby, Doctor May who is a physician, and another two men that he does not recognize.
These men stop by to look at the working men, and as they are talking and observing, they spot a weird object that has the shape of a human.
As they get closer, they see that it is an odd shaped statue built with korl.
They begin to analyze it and wonder who created such a statue, one of the workers points at Wolfe and the men go to him.
They ask him why he built such a statue and what it represents.
All Hugh says is that "She be hungry".
The men begin to talk about the injustice of labor force, and one goes as far as to say that Hugh can get out of the meager job he is in, but that he unfortunately cannot help.
The men leave, but not before Deborah steals one of their wallets, which has a check for a substantial amount inside.
They go back home and Wolfe feels like he is a failure and feels anger towards his economical situation.
Once home, Deborah confesses to stealing from Mitchell, and shamefully gives the money to Wolfe to do with it what he pleases.
Wolfe decides to keep the money believing he is deserving of it because after all they are all deserving in God's eyes.
The narrator transitions to a different scene with Dr. May reading the newspaper and seeing that Wolfe was put in jail for stealing from Mitchell.
The story goes back to Hugh and he is in prison with Deborah.
The narrator explains how terrible their situation is, and goes on to give detail of Wolfe's mental disintegration.
Hugh ends up losing his mind and killing himself in prison.
The story ends with a quaker woman who comes to bless and help with the body of Hugh.
She talks to Deborah and promises her that she will give Hugh a proper burial, and come back for her when she is released from jail.
