The Assembly of Gods is composed of 301 seven line stanzas which have the standard ababbcc rhyme pattern of the rhyme royal.
The meter, as critics have noted, is irregular.
The poem can be broken into five main sections: an introduction, three distinct but connected narrative episodes and a conclusion.
In the introduction, the poet establishes the setting using conventional astrological and geographical references which place the poem within the traditional framework of a dream poem and introduces the dreamer who sits “all solytary alone besyde a lake,/ Musyng on a maner how that I myght make/ Reason & Sensualyte in oon to acorde” (1).
But, before he can think through his puzzle he is overcome by sleep.
Morpheus comes and escorts him to the court of Minos which is being held at the estate of Pluto.
There the dreamer watches as Diana and Neptune accuse Aeolus of flouting their authority and discrediting them in the eyes of their worshippers.
Before the trial can be concluded a messenger comes from Apollo, asking Minos to hold off on the judgement and inviting all the gods to his palace for a banquet.
In Apollo’s palace, Diana’s complaint is resolved and the dreamer describes each of the gods and goddesses as they sit down to eat.
The gods won’t allow Discord into their feast, but as she is leaving she meets with Atropos and sends him to stir things up.
Atropos goes to the gods and complains that while the gods claim to have given him power to bring death to any who disobeyed or despised them, there is one person who has escaped his power.
He threatens to leave their employ if they don’t make good on their promise to him and give him power over this person.
All the gods agree that they will bring down this one who defies Atropos.
They quickly resolve the dispute between Neptune and Aeolus to ensure that the offender will not be able to escape in the sea or air and then ask who it is that has defied them.
When Atropos tells them that it is Virtue, Pluto says he knows him well and the only thing that can harm Virtue is Vice, Pluto’s bastard son.
Vice is called for, and he assembles his host for battle.
Morpheus warns Virtue of the impending battle and Virtue prepares his host and heads to the field of Microcosm, hoping to arrive before Vice and thus have the advantage.
The descriptions of the assembly of these armies are made up long lists of characters representing various vices and virtues and types of people under the influence of Vice and Virtue.
The second narrative episode of the poem is a psychomachian battle between the hosts of Virtue and Vice for the field of Microcosm, which is possessed by Freewill.
As the battle heats up, Freewill joins forces with Vice and they begin to drive Virtue and his host from the field.
Perseverance comes and rallies Virtue’s troops, defeats Vice and wins the field.
Freewill goes through a process of cleansing and is made a vassal of Virtue.
Reason and Sadness are given control of Microcosm and set about cleansing it of the weeds planted there by Sensuality.
A disgusted Atropos determines to leave the service of the “counterfete” gods saying, “For oo God ther ys that can euery dell / Turne as hym lyst, bothe dry & whete, / In to whos seruyce I shall assay to gete” (39).
He goes in search of the Lord of Light and is told by Righteousness that the Lord of Light has been his master all along.
Atropos’ name is changed to Death and he is sent to Microcosm.
Priesthood and the sacraments are sent to the field to prepare it for the coming of Death who causes the grass to wither and shuts the gates on the field.
The third episode of the poem takes place in the arbor of Doctrine where the dreamer is taken to be instructed in the meaning of the vision he has seen.
The walls of the arbor are painted with images of people from the history of the world which Doctrine uses to explain the meaning of the dream and the genesis of the pagan deities and to encourage the dreamer in the right way of life.
When she is done, the dreamer remembers his question about the accord of reason and sensuality and he asks her to “determyne that doute” (56).
She is surprised that he has not figured it out yet, and with that, Death appears.
As the dreamer hides in fear of Death, Reason and Sensuality appear and agree that people should fear death.
After Doctrine explains this accord to the dreamer he is taken back to his spot by the lake.
He awakens and writes his dream, exhorting those who read it, hear it read or see it to learn from it and asking the blessings of heaven on those who do.
